This paper is an exploration of the characteristic polynomials of
tridiagonal matrices. In particular what are the coefficients for
characteristic polynomial in a fully expanded form. This paper was
inspired by Matrix Analysis [@matrix_analysis] which posed the problem
of determining the characteristic polynomial of a 5 by 5 all ones
tridiagonal matrix. The followup was how this procedure can be
generalized.

# All ones tridiagonal matrices

Let $$T_n := \begin{bmatrix}
1 & 1 &   &   &  \\
1 & 1 & 1 &      \\
& \ddots & \ddots & \ddots \\
& & 1 & 1 & 1 \\
& & & 1 & 1
\end{bmatrix}$$ be the $n$ by $n$ tridiagonal matrix of all 1s.

::: ques
**Question 1**. What is the characteristic polynomial of $T_n$?
:::

A good place to start is to work with some examples. In this effort, the
coefficients for the characteristic polynomials of $T_n$ for $n$ up to
15 in decreasing order are given below.

::: center
  $\multicolumn{1}{l}{$n$}$                                                                                             
  --------------------------- --- ----- ---- ------ ----- ----- ------ ----- ----- ------ ------ ----- ----- ----- ---- ----
  ${1-1}                       1                                                                                        
  0$                                                                                                                    
  $1$                          1   -1                                                                                   
  $2$                          1   -2    0                                                                              
  $3$                          1   -3    1     1                                                                        
  $4$                          1   -4    3     2     -1                                                                 
  $5$                          1   -5    6     2     -4     0                                                           
  $6$                          1   -6    10    0     -9     2     1                                                     
  $7$                          1   -7    15    -5    -15    9     3     -1                                              
  $8$                          1   -8    21   -14    -20   24     3     -6     0                                        
  $9$                          1   -9    28   -28    -21   49     -6    -18    3     1                                  
  $10$                         1   -10   36   -48    -14   84    -35    -36   18     4      -1                          
  $11$                         1   -11   45   -75     6    126   -98    -50   60     4      -8     0                    
  $12$                         1   -12   55   -110   45    168   -210   -36   145   -20    -30     4     1              
  $13$                         1   -13   66   -154   110   198   -384   48    279   -115   -70    30     5    -1        
  $14$                         1   -14   78   -208   209   198   -627   264   441   -358   -100   120    5    -10   0   
  $15$                         1   -15   91   -273   351   143   -935   693   561   -847   -21    335   -45   -45   5    1
  $\multicolumn{1}{l}{}$       0    1    2     3      4     5     6      7     8     9      10    11    12    13    14   15
:::

This is an interesting pattern. Some immediate takeaways the first term
is always 1, the last term oscillates between 1,-1, and 0, and the
second term is a negative growing term matching $n$.

Using the standard method of finding the characteristic polynomial we
get, as noted in Matrix Analysis [@matrix_analysis] property 0.9.10 of
tridiagonal matrices,
$$\det \left| \lambda I_n - T_n \right| = (\lambda-1) \det \left| \lambda I_{n-1} T_{n-1} \right| - \det\left| \lambda I_{n-2} - T_{n-2} \right|.$$
This leads to the recurrence relation $$\begin{aligned}
 \label{tridiagonal_recurrence}
    p_{T_n}(\lambda) = (\lambda - 1) p_{T_{n-1}}(\lambda) - p_{T_{n-2}}(\lambda)
\end{aligned}$$ with initial conditions $p_{T_1}(\lambda) = \lambda -1$
and $p_{T_2}(\lambda) = (\lambda - 1)^2 - 1$. Evaluating some of these
yields $$\begin{aligned}
    \begin{array}{ll}
        1 & (\lambda - 1) \\
        2 & (\lambda - 1)^2 - 1 \\
        3 & (\lambda - 1)^3 - 2(\lambda - 1) \\
        4 & (\lambda - 1)^4 - 3(\lambda - 1)^2 + 1 \\
        5 & (\lambda - 1)^5 - 4(\lambda - 1)^3 + 3(\lambda - 1) \\
        6 & (\lambda - 1)^6 - 5(\lambda - 1)^4 + 6(\lambda - 1)^2 -1
    \end{array}
\end{aligned}$$

From [@real_tridiagonal] Gullerud, Mbirika, and Post explore the set of
tridiagonal matrices which are all ones except the main diagonal is
zeros. They come to a similar recurrence relation of the form
$$f_n(\lambda) = -\lambda f_{n-1}(\lambda) - f_{n-2}(\lambda).$$ and
find that the entries follow pascal's triangle on the diagonals instead
of the rows.

In our case the third entry also follows pascal's triangle. However the
fourth and onward do not. This is a step towards showing the
characteristic polynomials follow a sum of binomial coefficients.

## Chebyshev polynomials

Looking at the OEIS, I found
[oeis.org/A049310](https://oeis.org/A049310). This closely matched the
coefficients of the factored recurrence relation. From there I found
[@chebyshev_catalan_tridiagonal] where Artisevich, Bychkov, and Shabat
look into the relation between Chebyshev polynomials and Catalan
numbers. They use this relation on an application to tridiagonal
matrices. For a good introduction to Chebyshev polynomials see
[@chebyshev_polynomials].

Chebyshev polynomials come in for kinds with the second two being
derived from the first two by the half angle trigonometric identities.
In our case we care about Chebyshev polynomials of the second kind,
which from [@chebyshev_polynomials], are defined as

::: mydef
**Definition 2**. The Chebyshev polynomial $U_n(x)$ of the second kind
is a polynomial of degree $n$ in $x$ defined by
$$U_n(x) = \frac{\sin (\theta n + \theta)}{\sin \theta}$$ when
$x = \cos \theta$.
:::

From this definition it can be shown that $U_n$ satisfies the recurrence
relation $$U_n(x) = 2x U_{n-1}(x) - U_{n-2}(x)$$ with initial conditions
$U_0(x) = 1$ and $U_1(x) = 2x$.

This is very similar to the recurrence relation from
([\[tridiagonal_recurrence\]](#tridiagonal_recurrence){reference-type="ref"
reference="tridiagonal_recurrence"}) and shows why, in the OEIS entry,
taking $U_n(x/2)$ matches exactly to our factored form. However neither
Artisevich's paper or the book on Chebyshev polynomials had a good
solution to this recurrence relation.

## Catalan numbers and Generalized Fibonacci polynomials

Another similar looking OEIS entry for the coefficients of the factored
terms was, [oeis.org/A115139](https://oeis.org/A115139). This is an
interesting connection since it shows that the coefficients in this
semi-factored form are related to the Catalan numbers (or at least
through the Catalan number's generating function).

One of the references to the OEIS entry was [@fibonacci_polynomials]
which talked about generalized Fibonacci polynomials. In the paper they
were defined as follows
$$\mathcal{F}_0(x) = 0, ~ \mathcal{F}_1(x) = 1, \text{ and } \mathcal{F}_n(x) = d(x) \mathcal{F}_{n-1}(x) + g(x) \mathcal{F}_{n-2}(x)$$
for $n \geq 2$, where $d(x)$ and $g(x)$ are fixed non-zero polynomials
in $\mathbb{Z}[x]$ satisfying gcd$(d(x), g(x)) = 1$. In the paper was
the following Lemma, which was originally proven in
[@divisibility_fibonacci_polynomials] by Hoggatt and Long,

::: {#generalized_fib_formula .lem}
**Lemma 3**. *If $\mathcal{F}_n(x)$ is a generalized Fibonacci
polynomial of Fibonacci type, with $n > 0$, then $$\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal{F}_n(x) = \sum_{k=0}^{\lfloor \frac{n-1}{2} \rfloor} { n-k-1 \choose k } d(x)^{n - 2k - 1} g(x)^k.
\end{aligned}$$*
:::

Now in our case we can add two extension characteristic polynomials
$$p_{T_0}(\lambda) = 1 \text{ and } p_{T_{-1}}(\lambda) = 0.$$ These
don't really make sense from a matrix point of view since we can't have
$0$ by $0$ or $-1$ by $-1$ sized matrices, but this allows us to turn
our recurrence relation into the form for it to be a generalized
Fibonacci polynomial. They also still give the correct initial
conditions from
([\[tridiagonal_recurrence\]](#tridiagonal_recurrence){reference-type="ref"
reference="tridiagonal_recurrence"}).

::: lem
**Lemma 4**. *The characteristic polynomial for $T_n$, in its recurrence
relation factored form, is given by
$$p_{T_n}(\lambda) = \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor n/2 \right\rfloor} { n - k \choose k} (-1)^{k} (\lambda - 1)^{n-2k}.$$*
:::

::: proof
*Proof.* Applying Lemma
([3](#generalized_fib_formula){reference-type="ref"
reference="generalized_fib_formula"}) to the recurrence relation
$$p_{T_{-1}}(\lambda) = 0,~ p_{T_0}(\lambda) = 1, \text{ and } p_{T_n}(\lambda) = (\lambda - 1) p_{T_{n-1}}(\lambda) - p_{T_{n-2}}(\lambda).$$
We get that $d(\lambda) = (\lambda - 1)$ and $g(\lambda) = -1$. Putting
this together with the shift since we are starting at $-1$ yields
$$\begin{aligned}
    p_{T_n}(\lambda) &= \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor n/2 \right\rfloor} { n - k \choose k}  (-1)^{k} (\lambda - 1)^{n-2k}. \qedhere
\end{aligned}$$ ◻
:::

::: ques
**Question 5**. Can the formula above be used to find the exact
coefficients of a fully expanded tridiagonal matrix?
:::

To start on answering this question we can use the binomial theorem to
expand the $(\lambda - 1)^j$ this gives the following $$\begin{aligned}
    p_{T_n}(\lambda) = \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor n/2 \right\rfloor} \sum_{j=0}^{n-2k} { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j} \lambda^{j}.
\end{aligned}$$

From there we can carefully swap the sums and bring out the $\lambda$
giving $$\begin{aligned}
    p_{T_n}(\lambda) = 
    \sum_{j=0}^{n} \lambda^{j} \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor \frac{n-j}{2} \right\rfloor}  { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j}.
\end{aligned}$$

Thus the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial $T_n$ are of the
form $$\begin{aligned}
    \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor \frac{n-j}{2} \right\rfloor}  { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j}.
\end{aligned}$$ Sadly I don't see any way to get this in a more closed
form. The binomial coefficients don't seem to combine or simplify in any
meaningful way especially with the sign flipping every term.

# Generalization to constant diagonal tridiagonal matrices

Lets now turn to tridiagonal matrices who have constant diagonal
entries. We can define this as $$T_n(a,b,c) = \begin{bmatrix}
b & c &   &   &  \\
a & b & c &      \\
& \ddots & \ddots & \ddots \\
& & a & b & c \\
& & & a & b
\end{bmatrix}$$

Again applying the standard method of finding the characteristic
polynomial we get
$$\det \left| \lambda I_n - T_n(a,b,c) \right| = b(\lambda-1) \det \left| \lambda I_{n-1} T_{n-1}(a,b,c) \right| - (ac) \det\left| \lambda I_{n-2} - T_{n-2}(a,b,c) \right|.$$
Which gives us the recurrence relation
$$p_{T_n(a,b,c)}(\lambda) = b(\lambda - 1) p_{T_{n-1}(a,b,c)}(\lambda) - (ac) p_{T_{n-2}(a,b,c)}(\lambda).$$

We can use the same generalized Fibonacci polynomial formula with
$d(\lambda) = b(\lambda-1)$ and $g(\lambda) = -ac$ to derive the formula
$$p_{T_n(a,b,c)}(\lambda) = \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor n/2 \right\rfloor} { n - k \choose k} (-ac)^{k} b^{n-2k} (\lambda - 1)^{n-2k}.$$
Once again we can expand this out with the binomial theorem and
carefully swap the sums to get $$\begin{aligned}
 \label{generalized_tridiagonal_recurrence}
    p_{T_n(a,b,c)}(\lambda) &= \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor n/2 \right\rfloor} \sum_{j=0}^{n-2k} { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j} (ac)^{k} b^{n-2k} \lambda^j \\
    &= \sum_{j=0}^{n} \lambda^j \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor \frac{n-j}{2} \right\rfloor} { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j} (ac)^{k} b^{n-2k}.
\end{aligned}$$

Which gives that the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial for
$T_n(a,b,c)$ are
$$\sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor \frac{n-j}{2} \right\rfloor} { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j} (ac)^{k} b^{n-2k}.$$

# Concluding remarks

The coefficients for the characteristic polynomials of $T_n$ and
$T_n(a,b,c)$ have two binomial terms that flip signs. From
[@polynomial_powers_catalan_numbers] there may be an interesting ways to
simplify this using Catalan numbers.

The pattern for finding the determinant of a tridiagonal matrix may
allow for
([\[generalized_tridiagonal_recurrence\]](#generalized_tridiagonal_recurrence){reference-type="ref"
reference="generalized_tridiagonal_recurrence"}) to be extended to
arbitrary tridiagonal matrices.

::: conj
**Conjecture 6**. *Let $b \in \mathbb{C}^n$, $a,c \in \mathbb{C}^{n-1}$,
and define $$T_n(a,b,c) = \begin{bmatrix}
b_1 & c_1 &   &   &  \\
a_1 & b_2 & c_2 &      \\
& \ddots & \ddots & \ddots \\
& & a_{n-2} & b_{n-1} & c_{n-1} \\
& & & a_{n-1} & b_n
\end{bmatrix}$$ as an arbitrary tridiagonal matrix. The characteristic
polynomial, $p_{T_n(a,b,c)}(\lambda)$, is given by
$$p_{T_n(a,b,c)}(\lambda) = \sum_{j=0}^{n} \lambda^j \sum_{k=0}^{\left\lfloor \frac{n-j}{2} \right\rfloor} { n - k \choose k} {n-2k \choose j} (-1)^{n-k-j} \left( \prod_{\ell = 1}^k a_\ell c_\ell \right) \left( \prod_{\ell = 1}^{n-2k} b_\ell \right).$$*
:::
